.planning/STATE.md, before:

---
gsd_state_version: 1.0
milestone: v1.0
milestone_name: milestone
status: unknown
last_updated: "2026-02-28T18:40:02.000Z"
progress:
  total_phases: 8
  completed_phases: 3
  total_plans: 11
  completed_plans: 11
---

# Project State

## Project Reference

See: .planning/PROJECT.md (updated 2026-02-25)

**Core value:** A user can reliably run, manage, and reuse waveguide simulations with clear controls and traceable outputs.
**Current focus:** Phase 5 — Export Bundle + Auto-Export Engine

## Current Position

Phase: 4 of 8 (Folder Workspace Data Model) — Complete
Plan: 4 of 4 in current phase (04-04-PLAN.md complete)
Status: Phase complete — ready to start Phase 5
Last activity: 2026-02-28 — Completed 04-04: add folder workspace/index/manifest regression coverage

Progress: [████████░░] 38%

## Performance Metrics

**Velocity:**
- Total plans completed: 7
- Average duration: 11 min
- Total execution time: 2.03 hours

**By Phase:**

| Phase | Plans | Total | Avg/Plan |
|-------|-------|-------|----------|
| 01-settings-modal-entry-system-migration | 3/3 | 9 min | 3 min |
| 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux | 4/4 | 12 min | 3 min |
| 04-folder-workspace-data-model | 4/4 | 131 min | 33 min |

**Recent Trend:**
- Last 5 plans: 26 min, 34 min, 29 min, 42 min, 4 min
- Trend: Increased scope in phase 4
| Phase 04-folder-workspace-data-model P01 | 26 | 3 tasks | 3 files |
| Phase 04-folder-workspace-data-model P02 | 34 | 3 tasks | 5 files |
| Phase 04-folder-workspace-data-model P03 | 29 | 3 tasks | 3 files |
| Phase 04-folder-workspace-data-model P04 | 42 | 3 tasks | 6 files |

## Accumulated Context

### Decisions

Decisions are logged in PROJECT.md Key Decisions table.
Recent decisions affecting current work:

- Initialization: Scope set to Settings Menu plan + Simulation Management plan.
- Initialization: FUTURE_ADDITIONS tracks deferred unless explicitly selected later.
- [Phase 01-settings-modal-entry-system-migration]: Settings modal built on-demand in JS (no static HTML) to match View Results popup pattern
- [Phase 01-settings-modal-entry-system-migration]: In-memory _state object in settings/modal.js preserves control values when modal closes and reopens
- [Phase 01-settings-modal-entry-system-migration]: Getter functions exported from settings/modal.js replace direct getElementById calls in App.js, scene.js, jobActions.js
- [Phase 01-settings-modal-entry-system-migration]: checkForUpdates() accepts optional buttonEl parameter; event delegation passes e.target directly to eliminate secondary DOM lookup
- [Phase 01-settings-modal-entry-system-migration]: settings-action-row pattern established for button + help text in settings sections
- [Phase 01-settings-modal-entry-system-migration]: No changes to test_updates_endpoint.py — backend contract already fully verified; 3 existing tests pass unchanged
- [Phase 01-settings-modal-entry-system-migration]: Minimal DOM stubs used in openSettingsModal tests — no jsdom dependency introduced; consistent with existing test patterns
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: invertWheelZoom NOT applied in applyViewerSettingsToControls — handled separately via setInvertWheelZoom() to keep OrbitControls setup clean
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: Module-level _current cache lazily populated by loadViewerSettings(); getCurrentViewerSettings() avoids double localStorage read
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: debouncedSaveViewerSettings exported alongside saveViewerSettings — callers choose immediate vs debounced based on intent
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: Camera creation in setupScene now conditional on startupCameraMode — orthographic uses getOrthoSize() consistent with toggleCamera
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: Return {row,badge,checkbox} from _buildToggleRow so reset handlers use result.checkbox instead of querySelector (test-compatible)
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: Use setAttribute('style') not .style.cssText for test-stub compatibility — minimal DOM stubs lack style property
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: Camera sub-section reset does NOT call _applyLive — startupCameraMode takes effect on next launch only
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: New viewerSettings unit suite isolates localStorage/control application/wheel inversion/reset behavior with node:test stubs (15 tests)
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: Recommended-badge visibility behavior is now regression-tested in ui-behavior using modal construction stubs
- [Phase 04-folder-workspace-data-model]: Folder handle ownership centralized in `src/ui/workspace/folderWorkspace.js`; `fileOps` no longer owns hidden folder globals.
- [Phase 04-folder-workspace-data-model]: Per-task manifest schema includes required fields (`rating`, `exportedFiles`, `scriptSchemaVersion`, `scriptSnapshot`) and non-blocking write behavior.
- [Phase 04-folder-workspace-data-model]: Restore flow is index-first with manifest rebuild fallback and repaired index persistence.
- [Phase 04-folder-workspace-data-model]: Regression suites added for folder workspace, task manifest, index rebuild, and reconciliation metadata retention.

### Pending Todos

- [ ] Make code/tests the hard truth for behavior and adjust docs to defer to executable contracts where possible.
- [ ] Keep one small maintained architecture doc and trim stale narrative content from `docs/PROJECT_DOCUMENTATION.md`.
- [ ] Replace `docs/FUTURE_ADDITIONS.md` with a reviewed backlog process and prune weak/obsolete items regularly.
- [ ] Keep `AGENTS.md` governance current so future agents treat stale docs as non-authoritative context.

### Blockers/Concerns

None yet.

### Quick Tasks Completed

| # | Description | Date | Commit | Directory |
|---|-------------|------|--------|-----------|
| 1 | Diagnose npm ci lockfile install failure and harden Windows installer error handling | 2026-02-26 | e7846aa | [1-diagnose-npm-ci-lockfile-install-failure](./quick/1-diagnose-npm-ci-lockfile-install-failure/) |
| 2 | Archive superseded docs and update source-of-truth governance | 2026-02-26 | pending | [2-archive-superseded-docs-and-update-governance](./quick/2-archive-superseded-docs-and-update-governance/) |
| 3 | Implement cross-platform setup entrypoints, installer hardening, and gated Python 3.14 support | 2026-02-26 | 069706f | [3-implement-cross-platform-setup-entrypoin](./quick/3-implement-cross-platform-setup-entrypoin/) |
| 4 | Assess and add Python 3.14.3 runtime support; explain upper version limit rationale | 2026-02-27 | 47b1406 | [4-assess-and-add-python-3-14-3-runtime-sup](./quick/4-assess-and-add-python-3-14-3-runtime-sup/) |
| 5 | Fix setup gmsh install fallback and non-interactive bempp-cl install | 2026-02-27 | 899b52e | [5-fix-setup-gmsh-install-fallback-and-non-](./quick/5-fix-setup-gmsh-install-fallback-and-non-/) |
| 7 | Review Windows gmsh installer fixes and apply parity improvements to Linux/macOS setup | 2026-02-27 | pending | [7-review-windows-gmsh-installer-fixes-and-](./quick/7-review-windows-gmsh-installer-fixes-and-/) |
| 8 | Consolidate installer entrypoints into install/ and remove root setup wrappers | 2026-02-27 | 6bb9c8f | [8-now-there-are-two-installation-both-in-t](./quick/8-now-there-are-two-installation-both-in-t/) |
| 9 | Build terminal-first GSD provider switching for Codex, Claude, and local LLMs | 2026-02-28 | 830e343 | [9-build-terminal-first-gsd-provider-switch](./quick/9-build-terminal-first-gsd-provider-switch/) |

## Session Continuity

Last session: 2026-02-28
Stopped at: Completed 04-folder-workspace-data-model/04-04-PLAN.md
Resume file: None

Commit message:

docs(quick-11): set the default mesh resolution to throat:6 mouth:15 front:25, back:40, rear:40

.planning/STATE.md, after:

---
gsd_state_version: 1.0
milestone: v1.0
milestone_name: milestone
status: unknown
last_updated: "2026-02-28T18:40:02.000Z"
progress:
  total_phases: 8
  completed_phases: 3
  total_plans: 11
  completed_plans: 11
---

# Project State

## Project Reference

See: .planning/PROJECT.md (updated 2026-02-25)

**Core value:** A user can reliably run, manage, and reuse waveguide simulations with clear controls and traceable outputs.
**Current focus:** Phase 5 — Export Bundle + Auto-Export Engine

## Current Position

Phase: 4 of 8 (Folder Workspace Data Model) — Complete
Plan: 4 of 4 in current phase (04-04-PLAN.md complete)
Status: Phase complete — ready to start Phase 5
Last activity: 2026-03-02 - Completed quick task 11: Set the default mesh resolution to throat:6 mouth:15 front:25, back:40, rear:40

Progress: [████████░░] 38%

## Performance Metrics

**Velocity:**
- Total plans completed: 7
- Average duration: 11 min
- Total execution time: 2.03 hours

**By Phase:**

| Phase | Plans | Total | Avg/Plan |
|-------|-------|-------|----------|
| 01-settings-modal-entry-system-migration | 3/3 | 9 min | 3 min |
| 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux | 4/4 | 12 min | 3 min |
| 04-folder-workspace-data-model | 4/4 | 131 min | 33 min |

**Recent Trend:**
- Last 5 plans: 26 min, 34 min, 29 min, 42 min, 4 min
- Trend: Increased scope in phase 4
| Phase 04-folder-workspace-data-model P01 | 26 | 3 tasks | 3 files |
| Phase 04-folder-workspace-data-model P02 | 34 | 3 tasks | 5 files |
| Phase 04-folder-workspace-data-model P03 | 29 | 3 tasks | 3 files |
| Phase 04-folder-workspace-data-model P04 | 42 | 3 tasks | 6 files |

## Accumulated Context

### Decisions

Decisions are logged in PROJECT.md Key Decisions table.
Recent decisions affecting current work:

- Initialization: Scope set to Settings Menu plan + Simulation Management plan.
- Initialization: FUTURE_ADDITIONS tracks deferred unless explicitly selected later.
- [Phase 01-settings-modal-entry-system-migration]: Settings modal built on-demand in JS (no static HTML) to match View Results popup pattern
- [Phase 01-settings-modal-entry-system-migration]: In-memory _state object in settings/modal.js preserves control values when modal closes and reopens
- [Phase 01-settings-modal-entry-system-migration]: Getter functions exported from settings/modal.js replace direct getElementById calls in App.js, scene.js, jobActions.js
- [Phase 01-settings-modal-entry-system-migration]: checkForUpdates() accepts optional buttonEl parameter; event delegation passes e.target directly to eliminate secondary DOM lookup
- [Phase 01-settings-modal-entry-system-migration]: settings-action-row pattern established for button + help text in settings sections
- [Phase 01-settings-modal-entry-system-migration]: No changes to test_updates_endpoint.py — backend contract already fully verified; 3 existing tests pass unchanged
- [Phase 01-settings-modal-entry-system-migration]: Minimal DOM stubs used in openSettingsModal tests — no jsdom dependency introduced; consistent with existing test patterns
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: invertWheelZoom NOT applied in applyViewerSettingsToControls — handled separately via setInvertWheelZoom() to keep OrbitControls setup clean
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: Module-level _current cache lazily populated by loadViewerSettings(); getCurrentViewerSettings() avoids double localStorage read
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: debouncedSaveViewerSettings exported alongside saveViewerSettings — callers choose immediate vs debounced based on intent
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: Camera creation in setupScene now conditional on startupCameraMode — orthographic uses getOrthoSize() consistent with toggleCamera
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: Return {row,badge,checkbox} from _buildToggleRow so reset handlers use result.checkbox instead of querySelector (test-compatible)
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: Use setAttribute('style') not .style.cssText for test-stub compatibility — minimal DOM stubs lack style property
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: Camera sub-section reset does NOT call _applyLive — startupCameraMode takes effect on next launch only
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: New viewerSettings unit suite isolates localStorage/control application/wheel inversion/reset behavior with node:test stubs (15 tests)
- [Phase 02-viewer-controls-persistence-and-reset-ux]: Recommended-badge visibility behavior is now regression-tested in ui-behavior using modal construction stubs
- [Phase 04-folder-workspace-data-model]: Folder handle ownership centralized in `src/ui/workspace/folderWorkspace.js`; `fileOps` no longer owns hidden folder globals.
- [Phase 04-folder-workspace-data-model]: Per-task manifest schema includes required fields (`rating`, `exportedFiles`, `scriptSchemaVersion`, `scriptSnapshot`) and non-blocking write behavior.
- [Phase 04-folder-workspace-data-model]: Restore flow is index-first with manifest rebuild fallback and repaired index persistence.
- [Phase 04-folder-workspace-data-model]: Regression suites added for folder workspace, task manifest, index rebuild, and reconciliation metadata retention.

### Pending Todos

- [ ] Make code/tests the hard truth for behavior and adjust docs to defer to executable contracts where possible.
- [ ] Keep one small maintained architecture doc and trim stale narrative content from `docs/PROJECT_DOCUMENTATION.md`.
- [ ] Replace `docs/FUTURE_ADDITIONS.md` with a reviewed backlog process and prune weak/obsolete items regularly.
- [ ] Keep `AGENTS.md` governance current so future agents treat stale docs as non-authoritative context.

### Blockers/Concerns

None yet.

### Quick Tasks Completed

| # | Description | Date | Commit | Directory |
|---|-------------|------|--------|-----------|
| 1 | Diagnose npm ci lockfile install failure and harden Windows installer error handling | 2026-02-26 | e7846aa | [1-diagnose-npm-ci-lockfile-install-failure](./quick/1-diagnose-npm-ci-lockfile-install-failure/) |
| 2 | Archive superseded docs and update source-of-truth governance | 2026-02-26 | pending | [2-archive-superseded-docs-and-update-governance](./quick/2-archive-superseded-docs-and-update-governance/) |
| 3 | Implement cross-platform setup entrypoints, installer hardening, and gated Python 3.14 support | 2026-02-26 | 069706f | [3-implement-cross-platform-setup-entrypoin](./quick/3-implement-cross-platform-setup-entrypoin/) |
| 4 | Assess and add Python 3.14.3 runtime support; explain upper version limit rationale | 2026-02-27 | 47b1406 | [4-assess-and-add-python-3-14-3-runtime-sup](./quick/4-assess-and-add-python-3-14-3-runtime-sup/) |
| 5 | Fix setup gmsh install fallback and non-interactive bempp-cl install | 2026-02-27 | 899b52e | [5-fix-setup-gmsh-install-fallback-and-non-](./quick/5-fix-setup-gmsh-install-fallback-and-non-/) |
| 7 | Review Windows gmsh installer fixes and apply parity improvements to Linux/macOS setup | 2026-02-27 | pending | [7-review-windows-gmsh-installer-fixes-and-](./quick/7-review-windows-gmsh-installer-fixes-and-/) |
| 8 | Consolidate installer entrypoints into install/ and remove root setup wrappers | 2026-02-27 | 6bb9c8f | [8-now-there-are-two-installation-both-in-t](./quick/8-now-there-are-two-installation-both-in-t/) |
| 9 | Build terminal-first GSD provider switching for Codex, Claude, and local LLMs | 2026-02-28 | 830e343 | [9-build-terminal-first-gsd-provider-switch](./quick/9-build-terminal-first-gsd-provider-switch/) |
| 11 | Set the default mesh resolution to throat:6 mouth:15 front:25, back:40, rear:40 | 2026-03-02 | 2fadd63 | [11-set-the-default-mesh-resolution-to-throa](./quick/11-set-the-default-mesh-resolution-to-throa/) |

## Session Continuity

Last session: 2026-02-28
Stopped at: Completed 04-folder-workspace-data-model/04-04-PLAN.md
Resume file: None
